---
title: Multiple Goals in Floodplain Restoration - Workshop Notes
author: Noam Ross
tags: [floodplains, ecology, history, workshop, igert, notes]
date: 12-10-01 15:08:48
layout: post
--- 


![Panelists at the floodplains workshop. Left to right: Ron Unger, Dave
Shpak, Richard Howitt, Petrea Marchand, Elizabeth Andrews, Paul Brunner,
and J. D. Wikert. See below for affiliations and
titles](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/igertpanel.jpg)

We had a fantastic workshop on Floodplain Restoration on September 14 as
part of our work with UC Davis’ REACH IGERT program. Here are my notes:

* * * * *

Geologist and prolific floodplain-er [**Jeff
Mount**](https://www.geology.ucdavis.edu/faculty/mount.html) introduced
the day with an overview of the scale of changes in the Central Valley
and the types of challenges that had to be overcome to produce
functioning floodplains. Floodplains, he emphasized, need
connectivity with rivers, variability in flows and other processes, and
complexity in their physical and ecological structure. Then he went
through five areas of challenge:

1.  Scientific
2.  Geotechnical/Engineering
3.  Institutional
4.  Economic
5.  Social-Political

Mount thought that the scientific and geotechnical challenges were
relatively easy to solve (though he emphasized that many ecologists
might disagree). He was less optimistic about the institutional
challenges (describing the state of affairs in California as an
“ad-hocracy”). On the economic front, work on ecosystem services and
valuation is still developing, but is the new frontier. Finally, Mount
emphasized that we are in an unprecedented political environment, where
willingness to pay for the types of projects, environmental or other, is
at an all-time low.

No wonder they [call him “Dr. Doom”](http://goo.gl/uHy5t). Jeff also
announced his retirement from UC Davis. He’ll be missed.

* * * * *

Historian [**Phil
Garone**](http://www.csustan.edu/history/Garone.html) gave us a
fantastic long-term view of the human relationship with California’s
central valley wetlands. A major point was that, despite a 150-year
trend of severe reductions in wetland area, this story isn’t
entirely about declension.

As early as the 1920s, there was an understanding of how vital Central
Valley wetlands were to migrating birds. Early efforts at creation of
wetland preserves were championed by rice farmers (who hoped that
reserves would draw birds away from their fields), and subsistence
hunters (who were losing access to hunting grounds).

Garone also told a story of the creation of a reserve in the San Joaquin
valley and the fight against a single-use water policy driven by the
“agricultural mystique” - the notion that agriculture that is always the
highest and best use of resources -that has been prevalent for much of
California history.

* * * * *

[**John
Cain**](http://www.americanrivers.org/about-us/staff/john-cain.html) [of
American
Rivers](http://www.americanrivers.org/about-us/staff/john-cain.html) spoke
about work his team has been doing on modeling benefits to salmon for
the proposed [Lower San Joaquin River Flood
Bypass](http://www.americanrivers.org/our-work/restoring-rivers/floods-floodplains/lower-san-joaquin-river-flood.html).
John’s core message was that we need to measure it to manage it. So his
team has been finding ways to use hydraulic models to assess how flood
control projects change off-channel habitat that juvenile Chinook salmon
use for rearing.

John’s team looked at how several proposed plans the Lower San Joaquin
would affect both flood risk and the amount of off-channel habitat
flooded each year. They found that both changed dam releases and bypass
construction were needed to produce meaningful change in habitat, and
produced some new ways of presenting salmon habitat that were useful for
engineers.

John also had some fascinating stories of the realpolitik conservation
planning and projects. One of the biggest challenges is just getting
agencies on enough of the same page so that these analyses can be done.
It’s an enormously complex task, so getting alternative proposals
properly modeled requires institutional support.

* * * * *

**My [REACH IGERT
cohort](http://reach.ucdavis.edu/people/trainees.html)** presented our
work looking at the consequences of the Napa River/Napa Creek Flood
Control project. (I blogged about our work previously
[here](http://www.noamross.net/blog/2012/6/1/trade-offs-and-synergies-in-floodplain-management.html))

Our interest has been on the distribution of benefits from the river
control projects, in space, time, and among social groups. Our
historical work looked at the history of river modification in
California, in particular hydraulic mining, which not only filled rivers
with sediment but also redistributed mining wealth from gold-panners to
those who could put up capital for large sluice systems. There’s a
conceptual relationship between this and flood control in Napa, which
provided much of the city with flood control benefits, but also
exacerbated Napa’s already drastic shortage of affordable housing. Much
of the benefit ultimately went to the businesses that set up shop in
formerly flood-prone downtown, while housing became harder to come by
for many of the city’s residents.

We simultaneously looked at how the change in flooding in space and time
affected two important species - the Sacramento splittail and Fremont
cottonwood. We used outputs from a U.S. Army Corps hydraulic model to
drive life-history models of these organisms. We found that, while the
change in splittail habitat was slight, much of that change occurred due
to bigger floods in wet years, and this had an overall positive
(projected) effect on the splittail population. There were similar
results with cottonwood, though both models need to be parameterized
against local data in order to have more confidence in the results.

*Here are our slides from the presentation (available at
[figshare](http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.96210)):*

<iframe src="http://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/embed_code/14546659?hostedIn=slideshare&page=upload" width="476" height="400" frameborder="0" marginwidth="0" marginheight="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

* * * * *

**Alicia Kirchner** of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers gave us a view
of the nitty gritty of a multi-purpose river restoration project with a
case study of the Hamilton City Flood Damage Reduction and Ecosystem
Restoration project. This was a project in a small town in California
that couldn’t be justified on flood control terms alone, but could be
when ecosystem services were added to the project goals.

Alicia had a few interesting points. First, the Corps now has an
explicit mandate from Congress to perform ecosystem restoration, but
appropriation from Congress happens on a case-by-case basis, and
restoration usually gets the smallest part of the pie.

Secondly, rather than doing an explicit accounting of the value of
ecosystem restoration, the Corps instead has a series of qualitative
tests to determine whether such a project is justified based on both
local and national priorities. Then the value of restoration is assumed
to be equal to the construction costs, and these numbers are then
combined with the cost/benefit of flood control and navigation
components to get an overall accounting of the project.

* * * * *

Finally, we had a fantastic panel discussion with:

-   **Elizabeth Andrews** – ESA | PWA
-   **Paul Brunner** – Three Rivers Levee Improvement Authority
-   **Richard Howitt** – Department of Agricultural and Resource
    Economics, UC Davis
-   **Petrea Marchand** – Yolo County
-   **Dave Shpak** – City of West Sacramento/WSAFCA
-   **Ron Unger** – California Department of Water Resources
-   **J. D. Wikert** – US Fish and Wildlife Service

These folks really represented the range of actors who do the
on-the-ground work of river project planning in California, and there
was a lot to learn from their interactions. One of the main points of
discussion was the right balance of authority between state and local
authorities, represented by Ron on one hand and Paul, Petrea, and Dave
on the other.

Paul Brunner had some interesting to say about ecosystem planning from
an engineer’s point of view. For instance, that when ecosystem
restorations are added after initial flood control designs, the project
is never well optimized from a cost point of view. Also, ongoing
maintenance of ecosystem restorations is often the responsibility of
local authorities. This disincentivizes local agencies from doing
ecosystem restorations, because they can often only get support from the
state for up-front costs.

![Some of the workshop
participants](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/igertgroup.jpg)
