---
title: "Dynamics of Coupled Nutrient Cycling and Acclimation: 3 Modeling
       Papers"
author: Noam Ross
tags: [stoichiometry, class, notes, lecture]
date: 12-11-05 19:47:23
layout: post
--- 


Tomorrow in my stoichiometry seminar I'll be talking about the dynamics
of growth under multiple nutrient limitation and acclimation. Here are
my notes:

Rastetter and Shaver (1992)
---------------------------

In this paper, Rastetter and Shaver introduce a model of plant growth on
multiple nutrients, with the goal of understanding the conditions under
which single- and multiple-nutrient limitation arise, the difference
between short- and long-term behavior, and the role of
organism-environment feedbacks. It's not entirely clear whether this is
on the scale of a single or a population.

With this and the other papers, I'll outline some essential parts of the
model.

Availability of nutients $(E)$ can by *constant* or *variable* - driven
by the balance of uptake $(U)$ and replenishment rate $(R)$

$$\frac{dE_n}{dt} = R_n - U_n$$

Uptake is a Michaelis-Menton function of nutrient availability limited,
in part, by nutrient-specific uptake tissue surface area (roots, etc.,
$SV$):

$$U_n = \frac{S_nV_n En}{k_n + E_n}$$

with $S_n=B_n^{2/3}$, the biomass made up of the respective nutrient.

![The saturating Michalis-Menton
function](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/mm.png)

$V$ changes over time as the plant attempts to optimize uptake to
balance the ratio in its biomass to reach an optimal value, $Q$:

$$\frac{dV_n}{dt} = a\left[\ln(Q) - \ln\left(\frac{B_n}{B_2}\right)\right] V_n$$

### Equilibrium solutions: Three Cases

Case 1: When nutrient availability is *constant*, the plants act as if
under multiple element limitation, though responses to increased
nutrients may be small due to saturation of uptake.

Case 2: When nutrients are *depletable*, plants act as if limited by
*only one* nutrient (i.e., Liebig limitation), but the growth response
is *linear* with respect to the replenishment rate $(R)$

Case 3: When nutrients are a mix of constant and depletable, plants
respond as in Case \#2 when the depletable nutrient is limiting, but
above a critical rate of replenishment, act as in Case \#1, with
saturating limitation of the non-depletable element.

### Dynamics

Simulations were run under this model, increasing the supply of one
nutrient at $T=50$ and a second nutrient at $T=500$.

Case 1: With nutrients undepletable, plants increased growth in response
to increases in both nutrients, in both cases falling out of the optimal
balance of nutrients $(Q)$, but finding a new equilibrium at higher
biomass.

![From Fig. 1 of Rastetter and Shaver (1992) - simulation with
undepletable
nutrients](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/sim1.png)

Case 2: With nutrients depletable, plants experienced *initial*
increases in growth and biomass, but returned to previous levels in
order to balance nutrient levels. Only when both nutrients were added
was higher biomass sustained.

![From Fig.2 Rastetter and Shaver (1992) - simulation with depletable
nutrients](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/sim4.png)

Case 3: In the mixed case, plants responded as in Case \#2 until $R$ was
above the critical replenishment rate, then responded as in Case \#1.

Klausmeier et al. (2007)
------------------------

Klausmeier et al. use a similar framework to model the dynamics of
microbial growth dynamics and competition. In their model, growth under
two nutrients is subject to Liebig-style limitation of nutrient
concentrations $(Q)$ *inside* cells, while *uptake* into cells $(U)$ is
driven by Michaelis-Menton kinetics (designated by function $f$, which
is linear with respect to $A$, the allocation term.):

$$\frac{dQ_{n}}{dt} = f(R, A) - \mu \min \left(1 - \frac{Q_{min,n}}{Q_n}, 1-\frac{Q_{min,o}}{Q_o} \right) Q_n$$

$$\frac{dB}{dt} = \mu \min \left(1 - \frac{Q_{min,n}}{Q_n}, 1-\frac{Q_{min,o}}{Q_o} \right) B - mB$$

### Optimal strategies - Static

The authors show that a species whose allocation leads to co-limitation
has a continuously stable strategy (an evolutionary stable strategy that
is stable on its own).

![Fig. 1 from Klausmeier et al. (2007), showing zero-net growth curves
under three allocation strategies. $A*$ is the continiously stable
strategy, while species with $A'$ could be out-competed by $A''$ or
$A^*$](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/optimaltradeoffA.png)

### Dynamics

To make allocation dynamic, the authors simply change $A$ at a constant
rate so as to reach the level where both nutrients are limiting:

$$\frac{dA}{dt} = \begin{cases}
 c(1-A) &(P-Limited) \\
 -cA &(N-limited)\\
 0 & (colimited)
 \end{cases}
$$

The authors show two consequences of dynamic allocation. First, plankton
nutrient ratios can be sensitive to time of sampling, as it can take
time for biomass nutrient ratios to adjust to environmental levels. This
adjustment may take longer than the change in *biomass* that may result
from changes in nutrient levels.

![Figure 4 from Klausmeier et al. (2007). Simulated plankton nutrient
ratios $(Q_N/Q_P)$ vs. nutrient supply ratios $(R_N/R_P)$ at differing
sampling time from a change in nutrient supply
ratios.](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/timesampratios.png)

Secondly, the relationship between allocation rate and growth response
to nutrients is not simple. In simulations, organisms with *no*
acclimation ability grow as quickly in response to a nutrient pulse as
organisms that acclimate quickly, but slow acclimators do worse than
both.

![Fig. 5 from Klausmeier et al. (2007), showing response of species with
different acclimation rates $(c)$ to a pulse on one nutrient. From left
to right, $c$ increases, while variables from top to bottom are biomass
$(B)$, nutrient supply $(R)$, allocation of uptake to P $(A_P)$, and
species biomass nutrient ratio
$(Q_N/Q_P)$](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/klausgrid.png)

The high growth rates of slow-acclimation organisms in response to a
pulse suggest that this strategy may be superior in a fluctuating
environment, and in simulations, this is the case.

Rastetter (2011)
----------------

Rastetter (2011) examines the role of acclimation in ecosystem
succession and in and in ecosystem response to carbon enrichment and
climate change. He uses a slightly more involved ecosystem than the
previous two papers (detailed in the supplmentary information), which
represents plant, soil, and microbe nutrient cycling in a Douglas-fir
forest. He then modifies it in four ways:

1.  Plants and microbe growth is driven by M-M nutrient uptake, but
    nutrient uptake among different nutrients are uncouples.
2.  Nutrient uptake is determined via Liebig's law
3.  Nutrients are co-limiting, in which each nutrient's uptake is
    proportional to availability of the rest, and
4.  Organisms adapt by allocating uptake tissue, as in Rastetter and
    Shaver (1992)

When simulating forest growth and succession, the uncoupled model
reaches an equilibrium faster, while the Liebig model is sloweest.

![Fig. 2 in Rastetter (2011). Forest and soil nutrient accumulation
under the four nutrient coupling
models](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/rastetter2011succession.png)

Under the climate change simulations, the concurrent limitation leads to
more rapid changes following temperature and CO~2~ increases. The
uncoupled system is the only one to change with only CO~2~ enrichment,
though.

![Fig. 4 in Rastetter (2011). Forest response to climate changes under
the four nutrient coupling
models](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/3356641/blogstuff/rastetter2011GW.png)

Some thoughts
-------------

1.  These three papers study similar ideas, modeled at the plant
    organism, plankton population, and whole-forest level. Should
    similar mechanisms hold across these?

2.  What limitation or adaptation mechanisms are appropriate in what
    models? In what cases are constant-environment v.
    environment-organism-feedback approaches appropriate?

References
----------

Klausmeier, C., E. Litchman, and S. Levin. 2007. A model of flexible
uptake of two essential resources.. Journal of theoretical biology
246:278–89.

Rastetter, E. B. 2011. Modeling coupled biogeochemical cycles. Frontiers
in Ecology and the Environment 9:68–73.

Rastetter, E. B., and G. R. Shaver. 1992. A Model of Multiple-Element
Limitation for Acclimating Vegetation. Ecology 73:1157–1174.
