---
title: Regime Shifts in Forest Ecosystems
author: Noam Ross
tags: [regime-shifts, forests]
date: 2012-07-02 14:43:01
layout: post
--- 


As I begin to put together material for my thesis proposal, I'm
collecting literature on regime shifts in forest ecosystems. I'm
interested in the time scale of regime shifts, and how they compare with
the time scale of stand dynamics (typically decades), which are the
dominant time scale in forestry economics.

Here is a preliminary set of examples and citations. I've also created a
[Mendeley
group](http://www.mendeley.com/groups/2356851/regime-shifts-in-forest-ecosystems/)
with the papers I'm collecting for this topic. What other examples do
people know of? Leave your thoughts in the comments!

Pests and Disease
-----------------

### Spruce budworm

Ludwig et al. (1978) modeled outbreaks of the spruce budworm, which
occur every several decades and result in large-scale forest mortality.
Budworm populations slowly increase as the forest matures and provides
greater resources. Periods of warm dry weather can result in budworm
numbers large enough to escape the predation of birds, and then large
outbreaks occur. More on this at the [Resilience
Alliance](http://www.resalliance.org/217.php)

### Bark beetles

Raffa et al. (2008) has a pretty good overview of threshold processes
involved in bark beetle outbreaks. One of the key threshold processes
that results in regime shift is the interaction between host physiology
and beetle aggregation (Berryman et al. 1984). Nelson and Lewis (2008)
was able to determine this threshold through explicit modeling of tree
physiology. See also Okland and Bjø rnstad (2006).

### Sudden oak death

Sudden oak death, caused by the water mold *Phytophthora ramorum*, may
exhibit a host-density threshold in its dynamics. When tanoak hosts
(*Notholithocarpus densiflorus*), exceed a critical density (\~8% of
stems), outbreak may occur and result in elimination of tanoak (Cobb et
al. 2012).

Drought in piñon forests
------------------------

Positive feedbacks between drought stress and bark beetle populations
(McDowell 2011) can lead to sudden piñon die-offs following periods of
drought, which can result in long-term shifts in forest composition.
Allen and Breshears (1998) documented drought-induced shifts from
ponderosa forest to piñon-juniper woodland in the great basin area, and
similar shifts from piñon to juniper have occurred following the
2002-2003 drought (Mueller et al. 2005, Breshears et al. 2005).

Forest-grassland transitions
----------------------------

### Forest and savanna as alternative stable states

There's lots of literature about the feedbacks that maintain savannas
and control the forest-savanna ecotone and evidence that they represent
alternative stable states (Sternberg 2001). Staver et al. (2011) and
Staver and Levin (2012) show empirical and modeling evidence that, in
areas with medium levels of precipitation, forest and savanna are
alternative regimes maintained by fire feedbacks. Fire spreads over open
grassy areas, so fire areas with greater grass cover suppresses tree
regeneration, while fire is less likely to spread over a critical
density of forested area. (See also Baudena and Rietkerk (2012).)

### North American forest-prairie transition:

As the North American glaciers retreated \~8000 years ago, some areas
appear to have responded to the gradual shift in climate with rapid
transitions from forest to prairie, as documented by Williams (2009,
2010, 2011).

Logging Fire Regime changes
---------------------------

Lindenmayer et al. (2011) describe positive feedbacks in mountain ash
Forests of Southeastern Australia, where younger forest burns at much
greater severity than older forest. Increased disturbance frequency due
to logging has resulted in more of these young stands, and greater
landscape connectivity between them, resulting in a regime shift to more
frequent fires. The authors call this landscape-scale socio-ecological
regime shift a "landscape trap".

Ribbon Forests
--------------

Rietkerk and van de Koppel (2008) review work by Hiemstra (2002, 2006)
on "ribbon forests" in Wyoming, where alternate forested and
non-forested areas form because snow accumulates more in non-forested
areas, killing seedlings.

### P availability and soil degradation

Lawrence et al. (2007) describe alternative stable states in tropical
forest due to P limitation. Mature primary forest traps dust-borne P in
the canopy and has lower leaching losses than secondary forest.
Deforestation, cultivation, and fallow reduces soil P and replaces
primary forest with secondary, resulting in long-term P declines.

Plant physiology
----------------

This is on a much smaller scale, but there's hysteresis in the
pressure-transport relationship in woody plant xylem (Sperry et al.
2002)

References
----------

(*All of these are in in the [Mendeley
group](http://www.mendeley.com/groups/2356851/regime-shifts-in-forest-ecosystems/)*)

Allen, C. D., and D. D. Breshears. 1998. Drought-induced shift of a
forest-woodland ecotone: rapid landscape response to climate variation..
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 95:14839–42.

Baudena, M., and M. Rietkerk. 2012. Complexity and coexistence in a
simple spatial model for arid savanna ecosystems. Theoretical Ecology.

Berryman, A. A., N. C. Stenseth, and D. J. Wollking. 1984. Metastability
of forest ecosystems infested by bark beetles. Research in Population
Ecology 26:13–29.

Breshears, D. D., N. S. Cobb, P. M. Rich, K. P. Price, C. D. Allen, R.
G. Balice, W. H. Romme, J. H. Kastens, M. L. Floyd, J. Belnap, J. J.
Anderson, O. B. Myers, and C. W. Meyer. 2005. Regional vegetation
die-off in response to global-change-type drought.. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
102:15144–8.

Cobb, R. C., J. a. N. Filipe, R. K. Meentemeyer, C. a Gilligan, and D.
M. Rizzo. 2012. Ecosystem transformation by emerging infectious disease:
loss of large tanoak from California forests. Journal of Ecology.

Hiemstra, C. A., G. E. Liston, and W. A. Reiners. 2002. Snow
Redistribution by Wind and Interactions with Vegetation at Upper
Treeline in Medicine Bow Mountains, Wyoming, U.S.A.. Arctic, Antarctic,
and Alpine Research 34:262–273.

Hiemstra, C. a, G. E. Liston, and W. a Reiners. 2006. Observing,
modelling, and validating snow redistribution by wind in a Wyoming upper
treeline landscape. Ecological Modelling 197:35–51.

Lawrence, D., P. D’Odorico, L. Diekmann, M. DeLonge, R. Das, and J.
Eaton. 2007. Ecological Feedbacks following Deforestation Create the
Potential for a Catastrophic Ecosystem Shift in Tropical Dry Forest.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 104:20696–20701.

Lindenmayer, D. B., R. J. Hobbs, G. E. Likens, C. J. Krebs, and S. C.
Banks. 2011. Newly discovered landscape traps produce regime shifts in
wet forests.. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 108:15887–91.

Ludwig, D., D. D. Jones, and C. S. Holling. 1978. Qualitative Analysis
of Insect Outbreak Systems: The Spruce Budworm and Forest. The Journal
of Animal Ecology 47:315.

McDowell, N. 2011. Mechanisms linking drought, hydraulics, carbon
metabolism, and vegetation mortality.. Plant physiology 155:1051–1059.

Mueller, R. C., C. M. Scudder, M. E. Porter, R. Talbot Trotter, C. a
Gehring, and T. G. Whitham. 2005. Differential tree mortality in
response to severe drought: evidence for long-term vegetation shifts.
Journal of Ecology 93:1085–1093.

Nelson, W. A., and M. A. Lewis. 2008. Connecting host physiology to host
resistance in the conifer-bark beetle system. Theoretical Ecology
1:163–177.

Okland, B. rn, and O. N. Bjø rnstad. 2006. A resource-depletion model of
forest insect outbreaks.. Ecology 87:283–90.

Raffa, K. F., B. H. Aukema, B. J. Bentz, A. L. Carroll, J. a Hicke, M.
G. Turner, and W. H. Romme. 2008. Cross-scale Drivers of Natural
Disturbances Prone to Anthropogenic Amplification: The Dynamics of Bark
Beetle Eruptions. BioScience 58:501.

Rietkerk, M., and J. van de Koppel. 2008. Regular pattern formation in
real ecosystems.. Trends in ecology & evolution 23:169–75.

Sperry, J. S., U. G. Hacke, R. Oren, and J. P. Comstock. 2002. Water
deficits and hydraulic limits to leaf water supply.. Plant, cell &
environment 25:251–263.

Staver, A. C., and S. A. Levin. 2012. Integrating Theoretical Climate
and Fire Effects on Savanna and Forest Systems. The American
Naturalist:1–14.

Staver, a. C., S. Archibald, and S. Levin. 2011. Tree cover in
sub-Saharan Africa: rainfall and fire constrain forest and savanna as
alternative stable states.. Ecology 92:1063–72.

Sternberg, L. D. S. L. 2001. Savanna-Forest Hysteresis in the Tropics.
Global Ecology and Biogeography 10:369–378.

Williams, J. W., J. L. Blois, and B. N. Shuman. 2011. Extrinsic and
intrinsic forcing of abrupt ecological change: case studies from the
late Quaternary. Journal of Ecology 99:664–677.

Williams, J. W., B. Shuman, P. J. Bartlein, N. S. Diffenbaugh, and T.
Webb. 2010. Rapid, time-transgressive, and variable responses to early
Holocene midcontinental drying in North America. Geology 38:135–138.

Williams, J. W., B. Shuman, and P. J. Bartlein. 2009. Rapid responses of
the prairie-forest ecotone to early Holocene aridity in mid-continental
North America. Global and Planetary Change 66:195–207.
